Hello friends In this video let us understand how to
analyse time and space complexity of algorithms with examples
First let us take a simple algorithm with just one
statement we have int i is equal to 10 a single
assignment statement and as per our assumption it takes one
unit of time
So the time complexity T of X is equal to
one
We can say it takes a constant I
So the time complexity of this algorithm is equal to
order of one
And here we have just one variable let us say it
takes one unit of memory also
So a S of X is equal to one
So the space complexity is also order of one
Now let us add two more statements to this algorithm
i equal to into to place five and I equal
to I++
What will be the time complexity of this algorithm Now
as we said these two statements are also simple statements
So this will also take one unit time each
So the total time taken is 1+1+
1 that is T of X will be equal to 3
which is also a constant value that is whatever the
value of i be
The time taken will be three units to get the
output
So the time complexity is order of  one again
Now what about the space complexity We have variable I
which will take one unit of memory and in 2nd
and 3rd statements
Also we have just I and there are no other
variables
So there is only one variable I requiring memory
So the total memory required is one unit so S
of X equal to one which is also a constant value
So the space complexity is equal to order of one
Let us calculate the time and space complexity of positive
or negative number programme
Here the first statement is a simple assignment statement
So it takes one unit of time
Next we're creating a scan object
So it will also take one unit time and next
we're reading the number which will also take one unit
time
So this part of the code will take a total
of two units time
Next we have a conditional statement we have If else
if else statements here
So what will happen here for a given input Either
if statement will work or else if part will work
or else part will work simply
Any one of these three cases will work for a
given input for example if num equal to zero only
if part will work elseif and else part will
be skipped and if num equal to minus one
If will fail else
If will work and else will be is kept
And if num equal to four if will fail so
it won't work and else if will also fail
Hence it will be kept and only else part will
work so far an input value
Only one of these three cases will work so we
can take one unit of time for the whole case
check and one unit of time for inner print statement
So a total of two units time the total time
taken T of X will be equal to five which is
a constant value
The time complexity for this programme is order of one
Now what about the space complexity in the whole programme
We only used one variable now and we have only
used Constance other than that
So the memory taken is just one unit so S
of X is equal to one which is a constant
Hence the space complexity of this algorithm
is order of one
Now let us analyse the programme to find if X
is a factor of n or not
First we have a declaration statement which will take one
unit time
The next print statement will also take one unit time
Now in the scanning part we're creating scanner object reading
and reading X
These three operations will take one unit time each so
a total of three time units are required here and
next
We have a conditional check here for a given value
of end and ex either if part will work or
the else part will work
So for this case check we can say it takes
one unit time and for the Print statement inside it
takes one unit again a total of two units for
this part so T of X equal to one plus
one plus three plus two which is equal to seven
So the algorithm will take only a constant time for
any input to produce the desire output
So the time complexity is order of one
Now what about the space complexity we have variables
n and  X requiring memory so it takes two units
in total
So S Of X equal to two which is
a constant memory space
So the space complexity here is order of one
So this is how we can analyse algorithms and find
time and space complexity